Bit by bit, I collected
pieces of junk
and bit by bit,
she put them together.
All the while, clouds
began to fill the sky.
I wanted to fly
with these wings...
to leave this place long behind
before the cold sets in.
When winter comes,
she'll stop moving.
That's what she
told me, at least.
To be honest, I don't quite
understand what she meant.
All I know is
that time is short
and we have do something
before it's too late.
[children laughing]
[Kyou]:
Bye-bye! Take care!
[Ryou]:
Good luck!
[Kotomi]:
I can't wait to
see you all again.
[Sunohara]:
I won't forget you
after I'm famous!
Bye-bye!
Bye!
[Nagisa]:
Congratulations on
graduating, Tomoya.
[waking groans]
[sighs]
Oh yeah...
[Sanae]:
I know I said
it before...
but congratulations on
graduating. We're proud of you.
Now you're a real
member of society!
[Tomoya]:
I guess. But I really
just feel like a bum.
[Sanae]:
Oh? What are your
plans right now?
Uh, nothing in particular.
[Akio]:
You're pathetic.
How  bout you work here
at the bakery for a while?
[Sanae]:
That's a wonderful idea!
If you help out in the
morning, then I can pack
little lunchboxes for
Nagisa to take to school!
I've wanted to do that
ever since she was little,
but I never can
make the time
with all the baking
we need to do.
[Akio]:
But I'll warn you,
you ain't getting paid much,
so don't get your hopes
up or anything.
That sounds great;
thank you.
Well, I'm glad; I look forward
to working with you, Tomoya.
Wait, say again?
[Sanae]:
You don't mind me using
your first name, do you?
We're practically family now...
it only seems natural.
[bee buzzing]
That's great! Mom and dad
could really use some help
making bread in the morning, and
if nothing else,
it'll be an easy
commute for you!
It's a temporary
solution,
but I can't keep relying
on them forever.
This is off subject, but I'm
feeling a lot better now that
the weather's warmed up.
I think I can even go to school!
[Tomoya]:
Sure would be nice
if you could get into
the same class as
Tomoyo and Miyazawa.
Yep!
[Tomoya]:
I begin work
at five in the morning.
By this time, the Old Man
is already baking.
Sanae teaches me how
to do this and that
while she lines up
the finished bread.
Hi, Tomoya.
Oh! You going to
the opening ceremony?
Yep! See you later!
All right, take
care out there.
I will!
Good luck, Nagisa.
Give it your best.
[Tomoya]:
We're busiest from opening
till about 9:00 AM.
This is when most of the
sales for the day are made.
By noon, the flow of customers
pretty much dies down.
When things are quiet in the
shop, Sanae holds classes
for the kids in the
neighborhood.
This is another way for the
Furukawas to support themselves.
Hey, kid, I'm back.
[Tomoya]:
Where've you been?
Huh? Uh here
and there... y'know.
[Tomoya]:
The Old Man
wanders out sometimes.
I have no idea where he goes
or what he does.
It sure is slow.
Yeah, no kidding.
I hope Nagisa's doing all right
at school. I'm worried.
Well, there ain't no point in
getting stressed out about it.
I know... how  bout we play
catch with Sanae's bread?
[Tomoya]:
I dunno... we shouldn't
waste food, right?
Don't be such
a wet blanket.
Who says you can't have
a little fun at work?
[Girl]:
Excuse me...
Oh! W-welcome-
[Akio]:
Oh... thought
you were a customer.
I just wanted to see you
at work, Tomoya;
Your apron looks cute.
[cute giggle]
So, you found out what
class you're in, right?
Uh, yeah, but it's full
of people I've never met.
I think it'll be okay, though;
they seem really nice
and I'm looking forward
to making some new friends.
Sounds good.
[Akio]:
All right!
Forget about catch, now that
we've got enough people,
let's have a snowball fight
with Sanae's bread!
Umm...
[Nagisa]:
Mom's right behind you, Dad.
[Sanae]:
My bread...
You're saying
my bread...
[Sanae (fighting tears)]:
Is for...for hitting
people, is that it?!
[Akio (mouthful):]
No, I love your bread, Sanae!
[Tomoya]:
I began to realize
that the old man and Sanae
weren't doing things like
that because they were crazy...
they were doing them because
they wanted to see
their daughter smile.
Hey, Tomoya.
I'm heading to school;
see you later.
Oh, hey; You have club
orientations today, don't you?
Yeah. I wrote a script
and memorized it
so I'll know
just what to say!
Sounds good to me. I hope
everything works out!
Nagisa? Hey! You eat
breakfast this morning?
[Nagisa]:
No, but it's too late,
I already brushed my teeth!
Nagisa!
Oh. Hi Tomoya. I didn't
notice you there.
How was orientation? Did
it go well? Everything okay?
Yeah, everything is fine! The
speech went over really well.
Nagisa...
[Tomoya]:
Come on, tell me the truth.
It's all right.
[Nagisa]:
I got really nervous
at the orientation
and messed up my speech.
But Tomoyo and Miyazawa and
Nishina still clapped for me...
so it wasn't all bad.
Did you find an adviser
for the club?
Yeah, it's kind
of a strange match,
but Mr. Minoshima from the track
team is picking up the job.
[uneasy groan]
That guy, huh?
But we don't have
any members right now,
so if we can't recruit
at least two more people
by next Wednesday,
then the Drama Club
will be disbanded again.
I have to work extra hard to
make sure that doesn't happen!
What about your class?
How's that going?
Are you making
any new friends?
[Tomoya]:
Do people know this is your
second year as a senior?
Yeah, everyone knows.
That's why it's so tough.
I don't think people want
to talk to me very much.
It'll be fine. You've got
a likable personality;
I'm sure everyone'll love you
once they get a chance
to know you a
little better.
I sure hope
that's true.
I don't want to give up
on the drama club.
[Tomoya]:
Yeah.
I don't want to sound
like I'm being negative;
I want to talk to you
about fun things.
I want to be able
to smile and tell you
what happened at school, or with
the drama club, or whatever!
Hey, Tomoya?
H-huh? Oh yeah, right; I'm sure
we'll have a lot of fun stuff
to talk about.
Yep!
[Tomoya]:
Since then... Nagisa hasn't told
me anything fun about school.
If I try to encourage her,
I'm afraid it'll just
put pressure on her.
If I say  do your best , I might
just be stressing her out.
That's the way
I see it, at least.
But Nagisa was never late to
school and never missed a day.
With or without encouragement,
she always did her best.
But in the end...
despite her best efforts...
not a single person
wanted to join her club.
Phew...
Hey, Yoshino!
Hey. Look who it is.
Your job sure does
look tough.
[Yoshino]:
Yeah. We don't
have enough workers.
It's pretty
stressful sometimes.
I see...
Oh yeah...
[Yoshino]:
Congrats on graduating.
Huh? Oh... Thank you.
Anyway, whatcha
up to right now?
Just running errands...
that sort of thing.
Come and visit
us sometime.
Evenings are best, since
Kouko spends most the day
at the hospital.
Oh yeah, Kouko's younger
sister's been hospitalized
for a long time,
hasn't she?
[Yoshino]:
Yeah. But Kouko
believes she'll recover.
So I won't give
up hope, either.
Well, I'd better
get back to work.
Oh. I'm sorry.
Catch you some other time.
Even the ones far from the
station are expensive...
Dude, really?
[laughs]
That's funny, I was
growing my hair out, too!
[Kyou]:
Tomoya!
Hi Okazaki, haven't
seen you in a while!
Hey!
Yeah, what's up? You on
your way home from school?
That's right!
I haven't see you
since graduation;
is Nagisa doing
better now?
Yeah, she's fine; she
goes to school every day.
Good to hear!
It's not like we live
far away or anything;
I'd like to see you guys
every once in a while.
We just haven't been able
to make the time.
Maybe we can put together
some kind of reunion
after our schedules
clear up a little bit.
I didn't know school would
keep you so busy all the time.
And what about you? Still
freeloading off the Furukawas?
Come on, sis, you don't
have to be so rude.
No, you have a point.
Don't worry, I'm not planning
on freeloading off them forever.
I'm not used to you agreeing
with me like that;
It's kinda weirding me out.
C'mon! Don't look so down!
I'm sure you can make it on your
own if you put your mind to it!
Yeah, actually, I was
looking for a cheap apartment
before I ran
into you two.
[Tomoya]:
Didn't have
much luck, though.
Oh, um, that reminds me, my
friend said her older brother
is going to move out
of his apartment soon!
I-I mean, it's
an old building,
but you said you were looking
for someplace cheap, so...
Sorry! I didn't mean
to butt in or anything.
[Tomoya]:
No, that's great!
Please... tell me more!
[Tomoya]:
Yoshino!
Hold on...
[panting]
Yoshino...
[catching breath]
You think...
You think you could...
Could you get
me a job, please?
I'll work hard!
Akio:
I see. Moving out, huh?
[Sanae]:
If you're sure
that's what you want...
[Tomoya]:
Well, I'm an adult.
I don't want to be a burden
on you guys anymore.
[Akio]:
You got enough money?
[Tomoya]:
I've got a little
stashed away.
I haven't touched most of my
pay, so it should be all right.
[Akio]:
Fair enough. Well,
I've said all I can say.
You can do
whatever you want.
You took good care of me.
Thanks for everything!
You sure the shop's
gonna be all right?
Yeah, I wouldn't
worry about it.
No one's gonna come in
at this time of day.
[Akio]:
And show some gratitude.
I could see it in your eyes...
You wanted to play
catch with me so bad
you were about
to piss your pants.
[chuckling]
You just keep telling
yourself that, old man;
whatever helps
you sleep at night!
Listen, kid...
[Tomoya]:
What is it?
Come to me if you have any
problems, all right?
Being an adult
isn't always easy,
so if you need
a little help sometime,
don't be afraid
to give me a call.
I appreciate it;
it really means a lot to me
to hear you say that.
Guess you're not so
immature after all.
I have a question.
Yeah?
Would you let me take
Nagisa with me some day?
That's up to her; not me.
She's old enough to make
her own decisions now.
All right... gimme
your best pitch, kid.
I'll show you why everyone
in the neighborhood
calls me the
bread-baking Babe Ruth!
All right, nice pitch!
Ah!
[glass shattering]
Whoa!
You did it again!
You! Go apologize! I gotta
get back to work, dude!
[Tomoya]:
What?! You suck, old man!
[Tomoya (straining)]:
Careful, careful...
Wow...
Pretty small, huh?
Pretty old, too.
[Tomoya]:
You looking for
rats in there?
Oh, no! I was just thinking
that it looked really nice!
Well... if nothing else,
it's well ventilated, I guess.
It's not great,
but it's an improvement.
Now that that's taken care of,
I'm gonna return
the truck and head home.
Thank you for the furniture
and silverware, papa;
you're ever
so kind.
No problem, princess; Not like
we were using them anyway.
Hey, Nagisa... have fun,
but don't stay out too late.
[Nagisa]:
Yes sir!
[Akio]:
See you later.
Thanks for all your help.
[awkwardly clears throat]
Hey, Tomoya?
[nervous laughter]
Uh...I think I'm going
to make us some tea.
You just sit here and relax
in the meantime, okay?
Dango, dango, dango, dango...
[Nagisa]:
Dango, dango family.
I wonder if we'll live
together like this someday.
That'd be nice.
What was that, again?;
I couldn't hear you.
Oh, it's nothing!;
Nevermind!
[Tomoya]:
See you tomorrow.
[Nagisa]:
Yeah. Umm...
Hm?
I know you two
don't talk much,
but did you tell your dad that
you were moving to a new place?
I think you should at least
let him know where you live...
just... in case
something happens.
Yeah, guess you're right. I'll
try to give him a call later.
Great! First night in your new
place. I hope you sleep well!
Yeah. I'll try.
[Tomoya]:
And thus, I began
living on my own.
I'm an adult now, I can't
rely on anyone else anymore.
It was my first night alone.
I didn't sleep too well...
[Nagisa]:
Tomoya, wake up! Hey! Tomoya...!
Your new job starts today,
remember? You're gonna be late!
Tastes great!
[Nagisa]:
If you like, I can stop by
and make dinner for you, too.
[Tomoya]:
Hmm... I don't know
when I'll be back.
[Nagisa]:
That's all right.
I'll just wait for you!
"That's all right..."
I'll just wait for you.
[flustered chuckle]
[deep breath]
Good morning, everyone!
Morning.
Uh, uhm... I was just...
[Yoshino]:
You showed up. Go ahead
and change into this.
Morning, you two.
Yoshino, is this the kid you
said is gonna be working here?
That's right, sir.
This is our boss.
Introduce yourself.
I'm Tomoya Okazaki.
I look forward to
working with you, sir.
I'll warn you, your first
few days might be a bit rough,
but you'll get used
to it after a while.
Just make sure you don't
hurt yourself out there.
Yes sir, I'll try not
to let you down.
You really have changed,
haven't you?
I'm sorry?
It's not a bad thing;
you just seem a little different
from when I first met you.
But that only makes sense;
you were just a kid, after all.
Ha! So does that mean
I look like an adult now?
[Yoshino]:
No. You look like a kid
who's trying really hard
to look like an adult.
So I'm still
a just kid, huh?
But you're serious now.
And what does
that mean?
[Yoshino]:
Means you're learning
to be an adult.
Anyway, do me a favor and try
not to quit on the first day.
If I get depressed,
it won't be pretty.
You think I'm gonna quit?
Not when I have an
apartment to pay for! Heh.
First, grab the ladder and put
it against the telephone pole.
Okay!
[Yoshino]:
And put your helmet on straight
while you're at it. You hear me?
Eh... heh, heh. Yessir!
[Yoshino]:
Try not to use your arms
to support your body.
Put most your weight on the
rope. Trust me. It's safer.
Th-That's easy
to say, but...
[Yoshino]:
Just do it. If you waste
all your energy
hugging the pole,
you won't last.
Tighten the bolts in a diagonal
order. That's basic.
Be sure to check everything
once you're finished.
You got all that?
Y-Yessir!
[Yoshino]:
All right, good.
Then tighten these bolts.
Okay.
Ah!
What's wrong with you?!
I'm sorry!
You can't afford to make
mistakes on this job!
[Yoshino]:
Think... what if someone
was down there?
What if someone you loved
was down there? Then what?
[Yoshino]:
That's why you gotta follow
the rules at all times.
Be careful.
Very careful.
Yes sir.
[Tomoya groaning]
Tired already?
Yeah, my whole body's
aching like crazy.
Always thought I had
better stamina than this.
You'll get
used to it.
Let's go ahead
to the next site.
Heh.
[Tomoya]:
How many more do
we have left?
[Yoshino]:
We have four more jobs
just like this one.
I'm leaving; see you tomorrow.
Bye. Good work today!
Ouch... Ugh...
I'm home...
Oh, Tomoya!
You really startled me.
Sorry...
[Nagisa]:
Are you okay? You're
not hurt, are you?
No...
Something really good happened
to me at school today!
It turns out that
Nishina's in the same
music appreciation
class as me!
Oh...
I haven't seen her in
a while, but Nishina said
she was worried
about me.
I see... That's good.
Tomoya, you look
really tired.
Maybe you should lay down
and get some rest.
[Tomoya]:
No, no, I wanna hear about
what happened. Go on...
Okay... I guess...
[Tomoya]:
Good morning.
You're not holding
the spanner the right way.
I showed you how to do it
yesterday, remember?
Sorry!
Right! Sorry!
[Yoshino]:
Did you check
the junctions?
I-I'm Sorry...
Why are you apologizing?
You didn't do anything.
Oh, sorry, I can't.
I have a mock entrance
exam that afternoon.
I'm sorry. I hate to say that
when we don't spend
enough time together as-is.